Creating Your First Ruby Gem

Making Gems - Easier than you think!
Ruby and Gems - A Quickstart

Making a Command Line Interface as a Ruby Gem
How to Give Your Ruby Gem a CLI
Making Ruby Gems Accessible via Command Line Interface

-------
Making a Command-line Ruby Gem - Write, Build, and Push
-------

Anyone who has used Ruby before knows that gems are the spice of life. They are easy to install and distribute, even easier to use, and most importantly, they provide useful functionality. It's not uncommon to see entire software projects centered around a single well-made gem. Just about any Ruby on Rails project does just that!

Gems are the way Ruby code is packaged up and distributed to people everywhere for easy reuse. It's easy to make your first gem, and even easier to reuse someone else's! Thousands upon thousands of gems are available on [RubyGems.org](http://www.rubygems.org), packaged and ready to solve your problems.

In this article, we're going to do two things. First, we're going to get started by creating our first gem and pushing it to RubyGems so that everyone can use it. Then, we're going to modify the gem so that you can use it anywhere on your computer, just by typing its name into the console. Sweet!

# Requirements

In order to complete this tutorial, you'll need an installed version of Ruby on your computer. If you don't already have it installed, consider first installing [RVM](https://rvm.io/), and then selecting the version you want. For the record, I used Ruby version `2.3.3p200` in the creation of this tutorial. As long as your version at least somewhat recent, you should be fine.

Note that this tutorial was created using Ubuntu Linux ([on Windows](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10)). I'm sure there's a way to accomplish this using only Windows, but I have to leave that for you to figure out.

# Setting Up the Gem

Let's start by creating the intial file stucture of our gem. Create an empty directory and `cd` to it. For this tutorial, I'll be making the `pagekey` gem. When you make yours, be sure to use a unique name that's not already taken on [RubyGems.org](http://www.rubygems.org).

```
mkdir pagekey
cd pagekey
```

The skeleton of our gem will consist of a `.gemspec` file to specify the gem configuration, a `lib` folder to hold our source, and of course our first source file. I'll create these now:

```
touch pagekey.gemspec
mkdir lib
touch lib/pagekey.rb
```

Now I'll edit `pagekey.gemspec` and include some information about our gem. Remember to update this with information specific to your own gem.

{% highlight ruby %}
Gem::Specification.new do |s|
  s.name      = 'pagekey'
  s.version   = '0.0.0'
  s.platform  = Gem::Platform::RUBY
  s.summary   = 'PageKeySolutions tutorial gem'
  s.description = "Created in a tutorial found on PageKeySolutions.com. Doesn't do too much!"
  s.authors   = ['Steve Grice']
  s.email     = ['steve@pagekeysolutions.com']
  s.homepage  = 'http://rubygems.org/gems/pagekey'
  s.license   = 'MIT'
  s.files     = Dir.glob("lib/**/*") # This includes all files under the directory, so we don't have to add each one individually. TODO[remove this]**
  s.require_path = 'lib'
end
{% endhighlight %}

Perfect. Now that the gem is configured, let's add some really basic code and test it out. Next, I'll edit `lib/pagekey.rb`:

{% highlight ruby %}
module PageKey
  def hello_world
    "Good morning world and all who inhabit it!"
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

Excellent. We're all set up on the code site. Now we can leverage the wonderfully streamlined gem workflow to build and test it! Watch how easy it is...

# Building and Testing

Package everything up, we will provide our `.gemspec` file as the only input:

```
gem build pagekey.gemspec
```

If all goes well, you'll see:

```
Successfully built RubyGem
Name: pagekey
Version: 0.0.0
File: pagekey-0.0.0.gem
```

So, install it!

```
gem install ./pagekey-0.0.0.gem
```

It's installed. Time for the moment of truth. We can test it on `irb`, the interactive ruby console. Type `irb` and it will start the interpreter.

```
> require 'pagekey'
 => true
> PageKey::hello_world
 => "Good morning world and all who inhabit it!"
```

Wonderful. It works as expected.

# Adding the CLI

Right now, if I type `pagekey`, I'll get some angry message like `pagekey: command not found`. This isn't good - I want to use my gem just like any other program!

In order to make this gem available under a specific command, we'll have to create an **executable** and link to it in our `.gemspec` file.

The executable will basically be a short Ruby script that accepts command line arguments and routes them to the gem's code in `./lib`.

Create a directory to hold the binary file with `mkdir bin` and edit the `bin/pagekey` file:

```
#!/usr/bin/env ruby
require 'pagekey'
PageKey::hello_world
```

Ensure that the file is executable with `chmod +x bin/pagekey`. After writing the executable, we need to specify it in our `.gemspec` so that it will be added to the system PATH variable when the gem is installed. Add the following line:

```
  s.executables = ['pagekey']
```

Now, the gem will look in the `bin` directory for the `pagekey` executable.

# Pushing and Publishing

There you have it. A beautiful gem, ready to go. But, until it's in the open air, I daresay it's nothing but a diamond in the rough. Let's get this thing in out there in the real world.

Make sure that you build your gem as described above with `gem build pagekey.gemspec`. Then, make sure you have an account at [rubygems.org](http://www.rubygems.org). Replace `USERNAME` with your rubygems username in the following snippet, and run it:

```
curl -u USERNAME https://rubygems.org/api/v1/api_key.yaml >
~/.gem/credentials; chmod 0600 ~/.gem/credentials
```

This will set up your system with the proper credentials to publish gems to your RubyGems account. The final step is very simple: Just push it!

```
gem push pagekey-0.0.0.gem
```

The gem will upload, and it will become available for the world to see and download!

# Bonus: Useful Rake Automation

One more tool that may be helpful as you be into the flow of gem development is `rake`, which allows you to automate processes using the Ruby language. In the base directory for your gem, add a `Rakefile` and add your own scripts. I've included an example that proved very helpful as I persued my own little gem project:

{% highlight ruby %}
GEM_NAME = "pagekey"
GEM_VERSION = "0.0.0"

task :default => :build

task :build do
  system "gem build " + GEM_NAME + ".gemspec"
end

task :install => :build do
  system "gem install " + GEM_NAME + "-" + GEM_VERSION + ".gem"
end

task :publish => :build do
  system 'gem push ' + GEM_NAME + "-" + GEM_VERSION + ".gem"
end

task :clean do
  system "rm *.gem"
end
{% endhighlight %}

The build command just builds the gem for you. The install command builds the gem and installs it, so that you can `require` it and try it out. The publish command also builds the gem, but it takes care of publishing the gem for you.

The arrow indicates a dependency of tasks. For example, `task :install => :build` indicates that `:install` depends on `:build`, and so every time that `rake install` is run, the commands under the `:build` task will be run **before** anything else.

This `Rakefile` relies heavily on the `system` command, whcih means that it is OS specific. All of these tasks can likely be performed in pure Ruby, but I found it much easier, especially for simple, small projects, to write everything as a `system` command.

One way to greatly improve this `Rakefile` (I'll leave it as a challenge) is to reference the GEM_VERSION in only one place within the application. Right now, you'd have to update the `.gemspec` file *and* your `Rakefile` if you wanted to change the version from `0.0.0` to `0.0.1`. This is not ideal. Since everything is written in Ruby, you would be able to `require` a configuration file that contains the version as a variable, and use that. Perhaps it would also be helpful to include a task in your `Rakefile` called `:increment`, which updates your gem version by incrementing the last number (moving `0.0.0` to `0.0.1` automatically).

# Wrapping Up

Thanks for reading. I hope this article will help you get started writing your first Ruby gem, so that you can contribute to the large and impressive open-source Ruby community. Best of luck!
